What Is ESP-Docs?
=================

ESP-Docs is a documentation-building system developed by Espressif based on `Sphinx <http://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ and `Read the Docs <https://readthedocs.org>`__. It expands Sphinx functionality and extensions with the features needed for Espressif's documentation and bundles this into a single package. It takes text source files written in `reStructuredText <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText>`__ and builds them into target formats, including HTML and PDF.

ESP-Docs is an open-source and common project. You are always welcome to contribute any functionality! See :doc:`/contributing-guide` for more information.

ESP-Docs is available as a `Python package <https://pypi.org/project/esp-docs/>`__.

.. _esp-docs-features:

Features
--------

ESP-Docs has the following features:

- Generating documentation for multiple targets from the same source files
- Generating API documentation automatically for multiple targets from header files
- Page redirection
- Linking to a specific file and folder in the project
- All features already provided by Sphinx, such as:

  - Source text format: reStructuredText
  - Multiple languages: English, Chinese, etc.
  - Output format: HTML, PDF, etc.
  - Extensive cross-references
  - Extensions


Third-Party Extensions
----------------------

Besides Sphinx, several other third-party applications (extensions) help to provide nicely formatted and easy-to-navigate documentation. These applications are listed together with the installed version numbers as the dependent packages to ESP-Docs in :project_file:`setup.cfg <setup.cfg>`.

- `docutils <https://pypi.org/project/docutils/>`__: open-source text processing system for processing plaintext in reStructuredText into HTML, LaTeX, etc.
- `cairosvg <https://pypi.org/project/CairoSVG>`__: SVG converter based on Cairo 2D graphics library to export SVG files to PDF, EPS, PS, and PNG files.
- `sphinx <https://pypi.org/project/Sphinx/>`__: documentation generator, which is the foundation for ESP-Docs.
- `breathe <https://pypi.org/project/breathe/>`__: bridge between the Sphinx and Doxygen documentation systems, making it possible to include Doxygen information in a set of documentation generated by Sphinx.
- `sphinx-copybutton <https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-copybutton/>`__: Sphinx extension to add a "copy" button to code blocks.
- `sphinx-notfound-page <https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-notfound-page/>`__: Sphinx extension to create custom 404 pages.
- `sphinxcontrib-blockdiag <https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-blockdiag/>`__: Sphinx extension to generate block diagrams from plaintext.
- `sphinxcontrib-seqdiag <https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-seqdiag/>`__: Sphinx extension to generate sequence diagrams from plaintext.
- `sphinxcontrib-actdiag <https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-actdiag/>`__: Sphinx extension to generate activity diagrams from plaintext.
- `sphinxcontrib-nwdiag <https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-nwdiag/>`__: Sphinx extension to generate network-related diagrams from plaintext.
- `sphinxcontrib-wavedrom <https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-wavedrom/>`__: Sphinx extension to generate wavedrom diagrams from plaintext.
- `sphinxcontrib-svg2pdfconverter <https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-svg2pdfconverter/>`__: sphinx extension to convert SVG images to PDF in case the builder does not support SVG images natively.
- `nwdiag <https://pypi.org/project/nwdiag/>`__: network diagram generator.
- `recommonmark <https://github.com/readthedocs/recommonmark>`__: a flavor of Markdown. With this package, Sphinx can build documents written in Markdown to target formats.
- `sphinx_selective_exclude <https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-selective-exclude/>`__: Sphinx extension to make the "only::" directive provided by Sphinx work in an expected and intuitive manner.

.. _esp-docs-self-developed-extensions:

Extensions Developed by Espressif
---------------------------------

Espressif has created a couple of custom add-ons and extensions to help integrate documentation with underlying Espressif repositories and further improve navigation as well as maintenance of documentation.

The section provides a quick reference to these add-ons and extensions.

Generic Extensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These Sphinx extensions are developed for Espressif but do not rely on any Espressif-docs-specific behavior or configuration.

:project_file:`Toctree Filter <src/esp_docs/generic_extensions/toctree_filter.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This Sphinx extension overrides the ``:toctree:`` directive to allow filtering entries based on whether a tag is set (similar to how ``.. only::`` does for paragraphs), as ``:tagname: toctree_entry``. See the Python file for a more complete description.

See :ref:`target-specific-doc` for an example.

:project_file:`List Filter <src/esp_docs/generic_extensions/list_filter.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This Sphinx extension provides a ``.. list::`` directive that allows filtering of entries in lists based on whether a tag is set, as ``:tagname: - list content``. See the Python file for a more complete description.

See :ref:`target-specific-bullet-point` for an example.

:project_file:`HTML redirect <src/esp_docs/generic_extensions/html_redirects.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

During the documentation lifetime, some source files are moved between folders or renamed. This Sphinx extension adds a mechanism to redirect documentation pages that have changed URLs by generating in the Sphinx output static HTML redirect pages. The script is used together with a redirection list ``html_redirect_pages``. ``conf_common.py`` builds this list from ``docs/page_redirects.txt``.

See :doc:`/writing-documentation/redirecting-documents` for how to redirect documents.

:project_file:`Add warnings <src/esp_docs/generic_extensions/add_warnings.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

In some cases, it might be useful to be able to add warnings to a list of documents. This is the case in ESP-IDF when we introduce a new target, which we build docs for, but not all docs are yet updated with useful information. This extension can then be used to give warnings to readers of documents that are not yet updated.

Configuration values:

* ``add_warnings_content``: content of the warning which will be added to the top of the documents.
* ``add_warnings_pages``: list of the documents which the warning will be added to.

See `conf_commom.py <https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/blob/master/docs/conf_common.py>`__ and `docs_not_updated <https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/master/docs/docs_not_updated>`__ of ESP-IDF Programming Guide for an example.

Espressif-Specific Extensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:project_file:`Run Doxygen <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/run_doxygen.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Subscribes to ``defines-generated`` event and runs Doxygen (``docs/doxygen/Doxyfile``) to generate XML files describing key headers, and then runs Breathe to convert these to ``.inc`` files which can be included directly into API reference pages.

Pushes a number of target-specific custom environment variables into Doxygen, including all macros defined in the project’s default ``sdkconfig.h`` file and all macros defined in all ``soc`` component ``xxx_caps.h`` headers. This means that public API headers can depend on target-specific configuration options or ``soc`` capabilities headers options as ``#ifdef`` & ``#if`` preprocessor selections in the header.

This means we can generate different Doxygen files, depending on the target we are building docs for.

For headers with unique names the path to the generated ``.inc`` will be the header name itself, e.g.: ``inc/my_header.inc``, while for headers with non-unique names the whole header path will be used, e.g.: ``inc/component/folder/my_header.inc``.

See :doc:`/writing-documentation/api-documentation` for how to generate API description from header files and include it in your documentation.

:project_file:`Exclude Docs <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/exclude_docs.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The Sphinx extension updates the excluded documents according to the ``conditional_include_dict {tag:documents}``. If the tag is set, the list of documents will be included.

It is also responsible for excluding documents when building with the config value ``docs_to_build`` set. In these cases, all documents not listed in ``docs_to_build`` will be excluded.

It subscribes to ``defines-generated`` as it relies on the Sphinx tags to determine which documents to exclude.

See :ref:`target-specific-doc` for an example.

:project_file:`Format ESP Target <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/format_esp_target.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This is an extension for replacing generic target-related names with the idf_target passed to the Sphinx command line. It supports markup for defining local (single .rst file) substitutions and it also overrides the default ``.. include::`` directive in order to format any included content using the same rules.

See :ref:`target-specific-inline-text` for an example.

:project_file:`Link Roles <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/link_roles.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This is an implementation of a custom `Sphinx Roles <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html>`__ to help to link from documentation to specific files and folders in project repositories.

See :doc:`Links to files on GitHub <../writing-documentation/links>` for an example.

.. todo::
  Add a link to the related section in :doc:`Links to files on GitHub <../writing-documentation/links>`.

:project_file:`Latex Builder <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/latex_builder.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This extension adds ESP-Docs-specific functionality to the LaTeX builder. It overrides the default Sphinx LaTeX builder.

It creates and adds the espidf.sty LaTeX package to the output directory, which contains some macros for run-time variables such as IDF-Target.

:project_file:`Include Build File <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/include_build_file.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The ``include-build-file`` directive is like the built-in ``include-file`` directive, but the file path is evaluated relative to ``build_dir``.

:project_file:`Docs Embed <src/esp_docs/esp_extensions/docs_embed/plugin.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This is a Sphinx extension to embed Wokwi simulator into the documentation.
The extension provides two directives: ``.. wokwi::`` and ``.. wokwi-example::``.

- ``.. wokwi::`` directive embeds a Wokwi diagram specified by JSON file and firmware binary file URLs.
- ``.. wokwi-example::`` directive embeds a Wokwi example from the docs folder. Currently supports only Arduino framework examples.

See :doc:`Wokwi Embed <../writing-documentation/docs-embed>` for more information and examples.

IDF-Specific Extensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _build_system_integration:

:project_file:`Build System Integration <src/esp_docs/idf_extensions/build_system/__init__.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This is a Python package implementing a Sphinx extension to pull IDF build system information into the documentation build process:

- Creates a dummy CMake IDF project and runs CMake to generate metadata.
- Registers some new configuration variables and emits a new Sphinx event, both of which are for use by other extensions.

Configuration Variables
+++++++++++++++++++++++

-  ``docs_root`` - The absolute path of the $IDF_PATH/docs directory.
-  ``idf_path`` - The value of IDF_PATH variable, or the absolute path of IDF_PATH if environment unset.
-  ``build_dir`` - The build directory passed in by ``build_docs.py``, and the default will be like ``_build/<lang>/<target>``.
-  ``idf_target`` - The IDF_TARGET value. It is expected that ``build_docs.py`` set this on the Sphinx command line.

New Event
+++++++++

``project-build-info`` event is emitted early in the build, after the dummy project CMake run is complete.

Arguments are ``(app, project_description)``, where ``project_description`` is a dict containing the values parsed from ``project_description.json`` in the CMake build directory.

Other IDF-specific extensions subscribe to this event and use it to set up some docs parameters based on build system info.

:project_file:`KConfig Reference <src/esp_docs/idf_extensions/kconfig_reference.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This extension subscribes to ``project-build-info`` event and uses confgen to generate ``kconfig.inc`` from the components included in the default project build. This file is then included into ``/api-reference/kconfig``.

See :doc:`Link to Kconfig Reference <../writing-documentation/links>` for an example.

.. todo::
  Add a link to the related section in :doc:`Link to Kconfig Reference <../writing-documentation/links>`.

:project_file:`Error to Name <src/esp_docs/idf_extensions/esp_err_definitions.py>`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Small wrapper extension that calls ``gen_esp_err_to_name.py`` and updates the included .rst file if it has changed.

:project_file:`Generate Toolchain Links <src/esp_docs/idf_extensions/gen_toolchain_links.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

There are a couple of places in documentation that provide links to download the toolchain. To provide one source of this information and reduce efforts to manually update several files, this script generates toolchain download links and toolchain unpacking code snippets based on information found in ``tools/toolchain_versions.mk``. These links can be found in `List of IDF Tools <https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-guides/tools/idf-tools.html#list-of-idf-tools>`__.


:project_file:`Generate Version-Specific Includes <src/esp_docs/idf_extensions/gen_version_specific_includes.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This extension automatically generates reStructuredText ``.inc`` snippets with version-based content for this ESP-IDF version, such as ``git-clone-bash.inc``.

:project_file:`Generate Defines <src/esp_docs/idf_extensions/gen_defines.py>`
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This extension integrates defines from IDF into the Sphinx build and runs after the IDF dummy project has been built.

It parses defines and adds them as Sphinx tags.

It emits the new ``defines-generated`` event which has a dictionary of raw text define values that other extensions can use to generate relevant data.

Sphinx-IDF-Theme
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HTML/CSS theme for Sphinx based on ReadtheDocs's Sphinx theme. For more information see the `Sphinx-IDF-theme repository <https://github.com/espressif/sphinx_idf_theme>`__.